# Project methods overview

## Data Sources

Unpublished aggregated data from [Linked Disturbance Group](https://github.com/tylerhoecker/linked_disturbance) from Forest Resilience Working Group. Used with permission of group. Data gathered from all public sources: GEDI, MODIS, and more.

## Data Processing Steps - Luis

Code for cleaning original data frame is in [data_wrangling.r](https://github.com/CU-ESIIL/FCC24_Group_6/blob/gh-pages-documentation/code/data-processing/data_wrangling.r). We filtered out above-ground biomass density values >500 Mg/ha to reduce outliers due to low quality GEDI retrievals. After filtering, the dataset contained 3,393,031 GEDI observations.

This script saves a cleaned csv in ~/data/. The rest of the analyses load from this cleaned csv. 

## Data Analysis

### Baseline model: Inverse Distance Weighting - Tyler
To have a baseline to compare against, we performed spatial interpolation to approximately 1km x 1km pixels using Inverse Distance Weighting on the GEDI above-ground biomass density point estimates. 

### Random Forest Modeling - Kylen
Random forest modeling was performed on CyVerse using the R [spatialRF](https://blasbenito.github.io/spatialRF/) package. The script for modeling is [code/analysis/spatial_rf_model.R](https://github.com/CU-ESIIL/FCC24_Group_6/tree/gh-pages-documentation/code/analysis/spatial_rf_model.R). We trained a model with 500 trees, a minimum node size of 25, and mtry (the number of variables to possibly split with in each node) set to 3. 

### Model Evaluation - Kylen
Both models (the baseine inverse-distance weighting model and the random forest model) were trained on a training set consisting of 70% of the GEDI data rows. 15% of the data were used as a validation set and 15% were withheld as a final test set. After training, we computed RMSE and R^2 on the validation set to compare. The model evaluation script is [code/analysis/calculate_accuracy_stats.R](https://github.com/CU-ESIIL/FCC24_Group_6/blob/main/code/analysis/calculate_accuracy_stats.R). It uses csvs generated by the spatial_rf_model.R and spatial_interpolation.R scripts. 

## Visualizations - Nat/Bre/Luis
Describe visualizations created and any specialized techniques or libraries that users should be aware of.

## Conclusions
Summary of the full workflow and its outcomes. Reflect on the methods used.

## References
Citations of tools, data sources, and other references used.
